Pursuing peace can be a challenge.
Because of our imperfections and the complexities of life,
we have to work for peace, even under normal conditions.
But pursuing peace becomes a greater challenge when it's one-sided.
Difficult these arise in the family and in the congregation
when one person pursues peace, but the other does not.
For example, in the congregation, perhaps we have a friend
who has a problem with another friend in the congregation,
but does not do anything to reconcile the situation.
Or in the family, a Christian mate may have difficulty pursuing peace
if his or her spouse does not apply Bible principles.
Well, what do we do then?
Well, in those situations, the Bible account of Abigail may be helpful.
And invite you to turn in your Bibles through 1 Samuel, chapter 25.
And here we're introduced to Abigail and her husband, Nebel.
And you notice here in verse 3, Nebel is described as harsh.
In verse 25, Abigail describes him as senseless.
In verse 17, his own worker describes him as worthless
and says nobody can speak with him.
Well, with a personality like that,
it's not surprising that his name is Streets, David's young man.
And now David wants revenge.
How do you pursue peace in a situation like that?
What does Abigail do?
Well, you think about it, what she could have done.
See, Abigail could have done nothing.
It's not hard to imagine that she had a difficult life
as well living with this man.
She could have just stepped back, let David come through
and do what he had in mind.
Or she could have gone out to David
and inflamed the situation,
maybe describing what a terrible man he is
and how he mistreats her as well.
See, either these approaches could have made her life easier
but she didn't do that.
Now, Abigail could not change her husband's ways
but she did what she could to diffuse an escalating conflict.
In fact, notice her respectful, well chosen words.
Let's go back to 1 Samuel 25
and let's read verses 27 through 31.
Now, let this gift that your servant girl
has brought to my Lord be given to the young man
who are following my Lord.
Pardon please, the transgression of your servant girl.
For Jehovah will without fail,
make for my Lord a lasting house
because my Lord is fighting the wars of Jehovah
and no evil has been found in you all your days.
When someone rises up to pursue you and seeks your life,
the life of my Lord will be wrapped securely
in the bag of life with Jehovah your God.
But the lives of your enemies,
he will hurl away like stones from a sling.
And when Jehovah has done for my Lord
all the good things he has promised
and he points you as leader over Israel,
you will have no remorse or regret in your heart
for shedding blood without cause
and for letting the hand of my Lord take revenge.
When Jehovah confers good upon my Lord,
remember your servant girl.
And do you notice what Abigail does?
She comes in with the gift.
She bows down to David.
She takes the blame for the situation herself
and she reasons with him using godly principles.
Abigail's actions calm David and a verdict calamity.
She pursued peace.
But to do that she had to look beyond her own feelings
and consider what was best for Jehovah's name.
And that is not always easy to do.
But what was the result?
Because she sowed peace, she pursued peace,
she reaped peace.
How can we benefit from Abigail's example?
Why is it important to do so now?
Let's look at the following dramatization.
And later on, when things got even more intense,
that's when our peace was really put to the test.
Yeah, but Tim, you always found a way to keep us positive.
Well, I learned a lot about that from my better half.
Amy's always had a way of bringing people together.
For example, just before the pandemic,
there were these two pioneer sisters in our congregation.
Becky was energetic, industrious, and fearless
in her ministry.
And Lena experienced self-sacrificing
and such a good Bible teacher.
But they didn't exactly get along.
You ready to go?
Are you okay?
It's just, it's Becky.
She's just such a phantom pioneer.
We never see her.
I'm sorry, but she just needs me to be serious
about her ministry.
Oh, she's been doing nitro witnessing.
I know, I know, an LDC, too, right?
She does plumbing, concrete.
She does have a lot of energy.
I remember when we used to be like that.
I don't know that I was ever like Becky.
No, you weren't.
You were Becky or the Becky.
I couldn't keep up with you.
Those long service days in your little red car.
That feels like a long time ago.
You know, Becky reminds me a lot of you.
I mean, both of us, 20 years ago.
She's working so hard,
and she's made so many sacrifices for the truth,
just like you have.
I think we should get together, the three of us.
You should get to know her better.
The next week, I had them both over to the house.
And the more those two got to know each other,
the closer they became.
You know that proverb, the tongue of the wise is a healing.
Amy taught me what that verse really means.
Okay, everyone out.
When everything changed,
and we suddenly found ourselves locked up together,
I tried to show that same spirit
so that we could stay united.
And with Jehovah's help, we did.
Now, did you notice what our sister did and did not do?
And she could have done nothing.
She could have let Lena, her service partner,
cultivate those thoughts about Becky.
Or Amy could have poured fuel on the situation,
maybe agreeing with Lena,
or telling a few stories how Becky annoyed her as well.
But she did not do that.
See, Amy's desire to sow peace moved her to help Lena
see things from a different perspective.
And as a result, the congregation benefited and reaped peace.
Notice how the Apostle Paul explains this approach
that we should take.
If you turn to your Bibles to Romans, chapter 12 and verse 18.
Romans, chapter 12 and verse 18.
If possible, as far as it depends on you,
be peaceable with all men.
As far as it depends on you.
See, our congregations, our families benefit
when we sow seeds of peace before matters get out of hand.
It's like seeing a small fire in our house.
What do we do?
Do we just ignore it?
And hope it goes away?
Do we fan the flames?
Do we put fuel on it?
No, we do something.
Why?
Because we know that if left unchecked,
that fire could destroy our home.
Well, as similar when we see problems
that develop in peace being disrupted,
we do the same.
Why?
Because we know that if we don't do something,
and if it's left unchecked,
that disturbance could destroy our family and the congregation.
So the question is,
is how do we sow seeds of peace?
Well, Abigail was a good example.
Did you notice what she did?
Is she considered how best to approach the situation?
She was proactive.
She didn't just hope it would go away on its own.
She used respectful, soothing speech.
She was careful not to fan the flames or add fuel to it.
Oh, good steps we can take.
And we have other resources to help us as well.
We can do research in the Bible and in our publications
to see how others have sowed peace in similar situations.
And we can also consult with the elders.
Now, we understand that this is especially a challenge
if the situation is in the family as it was for Abigail.
That is not easy at all.
And in those situations,
try to focus on your mate's good qualities,
not on his or her irritating traits.
But with all of this, we have to be realistic.
Remember what the Apostle Paul said there
is recorded in verse 18?
He says, if possible, as far as it depends on you.
So Paul was acknowledging that peace with others
may not always be possible.
So what do we do?
We have to do the best that we can.
And then we leave the rest in Jehovah's hands.
So may we be determined to develop the practice
of pursuing peace now.
At whether we're in the congregation or in the family,
we can be confident that if we sow peace,
we will reap peace even if others don't respond.
How?
Well, we'll have peace with Jehovah,
peace with ourselves and the knowledge
that we did the right thing.
Additionally, when in the future,
a force for peace is vitally needed,
we will be prepared to provide it.
For the William Mallonfond,
a helper to the teaching committee,
we'll now consider the next talk of this symposium,
how they sowed and reap peace, myfibisheth.